Moral luck
There has been a strain of philosophical thought which identifies the
end of life as happiness, happiness as reflective tranquillity, and
tranquillity as the product of self-sufficiency - what is not in the
domain of the self is not in its control, and so is subject to luck and
the contingent enemies of tranquillity. The most extreme versions of
this outlook in the Western tradition are certain doctrines of classical
antiquity, though it is a notable fact about them that while the good
man, the sage, was immune to the impact of incident luck, it was a
matter of what may be called constitutive luck that one was a sage,
or capable of becoming one: for the many and vulgar this was not
(on the prevailing view) an available course.
The idea that one's whole life can in some such way be rendered
immune to luck has perhaps rarely prevailed since (it did not prevail,
for instance, in mainstream Christianity), but its place has been taken
by the still powerfully influential idea that there is one basic form of
value, moral value, which is immune to luck and — in the crucial term
of the idea's most rigorous exponent — 'unconditioned'. Both the
disposition to correct moral judgment, and the objects of such
judgment, are on this view free from external contingency, for both
are, in their related ways, the product of the unconditioned will.
Anything which is the product o f happy or unhappy contingency is
no proper object of moral assessment, and no proper determinant of
it, either. 1
 Just as, in the realm of character, it is motive that counts,
1
 Kant's own account of this centrally involves the role of the Categorical Imperative.
On that issue, I agree with what I take to be the substance of Philippa Foot's position
('Morality as a System of Hypothetical Imperatives', Phil. Rev. 1972; and her reply
to Frankena, Philosophy 1975), but not at all with her way of putting it. In so far
as there is a clear distinction between categorical and hypothetical imperatives, and
in so far as morality consists of imperatives, it consists of categorical imperatives.
The point is that the fact that an imperative is (in this sense) categorical provides
no reason at all for obeying it. Nor need Kant think it does: the authority of the
20
Moral luck 21
not style, or powers, or endowment, so in action it is not changes
actually effected in the world, but intention. With these considerations
there is supposed to disappear even that constitutive luck from which
the ancient sages were happy to benefit. The capacity for moral agency
is supposedly present to any rational agent whatsoever, to anyone for
whom the question can even present itself. The successful moral life,
removed from considerations o f birth, lucky upbringing, or indeed of
the incomprehensible Grace o f a non-Pelagian God, is presented as a
career open not merely to the talents, but to a talent which all rational
beings necessarily possess in the same degree. Such a conception has
an ultimate form of justice at its heart, and that is its allure. Kantianism
is only superficially repulsive — despite appearances, it offers an inducement, solace to a sense of the world's unfairness.
It can offer that solace, however, only if something more is granted.
Even if moral value were radically unconditioned by luck, that would
not be very significant if moral value were merely one kind of value
among others. Rather, moral value has to possess some special, indeed
supreme, kind of dignity or importance. The thought that there is a
kind of value which is, unlike others, accessible to all rational agents,
offers little encouragement if that kind of value is merely a last resort,
the doss-house of the spirit. Rather, it must have a claim on one's most
fundamental concerns as a rational agent, and in one's recognition of
that one is supposed to grasp, not only morality's immunity to luck,
but one's own partial immunity to luck through morality.
Any conception of ' moral luck', on this view, is radically incoherent. The phrase indeed sounds strange. This is because the Kantian
conception embodies, in a very pure form, something which is basic
to our ideas of morality. Yet the aim of making morality immune to
luck is bound to be disappointed. The form of this point which is most
familiar, from discussions of freewill, is that the dispositions of
morality, however far back they are placed in the direction of motive
and intention, are as 'conditioned' as anything else. However, the bitter
truth (I take it to be both) that morality is subject, after all, to
constitutive luck is not what I am going to discuss. The Kantian
conception links, and affects, a range of notions: morality, rationality,
justification, and ultimate or supreme value. The linkage between those
notions, under the Kantian conception, has a number of consequences
Categorical Imperative is supposed (mysteriously enough) to derive not just from
its being (in this sense) categorical, but from its being categorical and self-addressed
by the agent as a rational being. 
22 Moral luck Moral luck 23
claims on him, and simply preferred to live another life, and from that
life, and perhaps from that preference, his best paintings came. That
sort of case, in which the claims of others simply have no hold on the
agent, is not what concerns me here, though it serves to remind us
of something related to the present concerns, that while we are
sometimes guided by the notion that it would be the best of worlds
in which morality were universally respected and all men were of a
disposition to affirm it, we have in fact deep and persistent reasons to
be grateful that that is not the world we have.
Let us take, rather, a Gauguin who is concerned about these claims
and what is involved in their being neglected (we may suppose this
to be grim), and that he nevertheless, in the face o f that, opts for the
other life. This other life he might perhaps not see very determinately
under the category of realising his gifts as a painter, but, to make things
simpler, let us add that he does see it determinately in that light — it
is as a life which will enable him really to be a painter that he opts
for it. It will then be clearer what will count for him as eventual success
in his project — at least, some possible outcomes will be clear examples
of success (which does not have to be the same thing as recognition),
however many others may be unclear.
Whether he will succeed cannot, in the nature of the case, be
foreseen. We are not dealing here with the removal o f an external
obstacle to something which, once that is removed, will fairly
predictably go through. Gauguin, in our story, is putting a great deal
on a possibility which has not unequivocally declared itself. I want to
explore and uphold the claim that in such a situation the only thing
that will justify his choice will be success itself. If he fails — and we
shall come shortly to what, more precisely, failure may be — then he
did the wrong thing, not just in the sense in which that platitudinously
follows, but in the sense that having done the wrong thing in those
circumstances he has no basis for the thought that he was justified
in acting as he did. If he succeeds, he does have a basis for that
thought.
As I have already indicated, I will leave to the end the question of
how such notions o f justification fit in with distinctively moral ideas.
One should be warned already, however, that, even if Gauguin can
be ultimately justified, that need not provide him with any way of
justifying himself to others, or at least to all others. Thus he may have
no way of bringing it about that those who suffer from his decision
will have no justified ground of reproach. Even if he succeeds, he will
for the agent's reflective assessment of his own actions — for instance,
that, at the ultimate and most important level, it cannot be a matter
of luck whether he was justified in doing what he did.
It is this area that I want to consider. I shall in fact say very little
until the end about the moral, concentrating rather on ideas of rational
justification. This is the right place to start, I believe, since almost
everyone has some commitment to ideas of this kind about rationality
and justification, while they may be disposed to think, so far as
morality is concerned, that all that is in question is the pure Kantian
conception, and that conception merely represents an obsessional
exaggeration. But it is not merely that, nor is the Kantian attempt to
escape luck an arbitrary enterprise. The attempt is so intimate to our
notion of morality, in fact, that its failure may rather make us consider
whether we should not give up that notion altogether.
I shall use the notion of 'luck' generously, undefinedly, but, I think,
comprehensibly. It will be clear that when I say of something that it
is a matter of luck, this is not meant to carry any implication that it
is uncaused. My procedure in general will be to invite reflection about
how to think and feel about some rather less usual situations, in the
light of an appeal to how we — many people — tend to think and feel
about other more usual situations, not in terms of substantive moral
opinions or 'intuitions' but in terms of the experience of those kinds
of situation. There is no suggestion that it is impossible for human
beings to lack these feelings and experiences. In the case of the less usual
there is only the claim that the thoughts and experiences I consider
are possible, coherent, and intelligible, and that there is no ground for
condemning them as irrational. In the case of the more usual, there
are suggestions, with the outline of a reason for them, that unless we
were to be merely confused or unreflective, life without these
experiences would involve a much vaster reconstruction of our
sentiments and our view of ourselves than may be supposed — supposed,
in particular, by those philosophers who discuss these matters as though
our experience of our own agency and the sense of our regrets not
only could be tidied up to accord with a very simple image of
rationality, but already had been.
Let us take first an outline example of the creative artist who turns
away from definite and pressing human claims on him in order to live
a life in which, as he supposes, he can pursue his art. Without feeling
that we are limited by any historical facts, let us call him Gauguin.
Gauguin might have been a man who was not at all interested in the 
24 Moral luck Moral luck 25
not acquire a right that they accept what he has to say; if he fails, he
will not even have anything to say.
The justification, if there is to be one, will be essentially retrospective.
Gauguin could not do something which is thought to be essential to
rationality and to the notion of justification itself, which is that one
should be in a position to apply the justifying considerations at the time
of the choice and in advance of knowing whether one was right (in
the sense of its coming out right). How this can be in general will
form a major part of the discussion. I do not want, at this stage of
the argument, to lay much weight on the notion of morality, but it
may help to throw some light on the matter of prior justification if
we bring in briefly the narrower question whether there could be a
prior justification for Gauguin's choice in terms of moral rules.
A moral theorist, recognizing that some value attached to the success
of Gauguin's project and hence possibly to his choice, might try to
accommodate that choice within a framework of moral rules, by
forming a subsidiary rule which could, before the outcome, justify that
choice. What could that rule be? It could not be that one is morally
justified in deciding to neglect other claims if one is a great creative
artist: apart from doubts about its content, the saving clause begs the
question which at the relevant time one is in no position to answer.
On the other hand, '...if one is convinced that one is a great creative
artist' will serve to make obstinacy and fatuous self-delusion conditions
of justification, while '.. . if one is reasonably convinced that one is
a great creative artist' is, if anything, worse. What is reasonable
conviction supposed to be in such a case? Should Gauguin consult
professors of art? The absurdity o f such riders surely expresses an
absurdity in the whole enterprise of trying to find a place for such cases
within the rules.
Utilitarian formulations are not going to contribute any more to
understanding these situations than do formulations in terms of rules.
They can offer the thought 'it is better (worse) that he did it', where
the force o f that is, approximately, 'it is better (worse) that it
happened', but this in itself does not help towards a characterization
of the agent's decision or its possible justification, and Utilitarianism
has no special materials of its own to help in that. It has its own
well-known problems, too, in spelling out the content of the
'better' — on standard doctrine, Gauguin's decision would seem to
have been a better thing, the more popular a painter he eventually
became. But there is something more interesting than that kind o f
difficulty. The Utilitarian perspective, not uniquely but clearly, will
miss a very important dimension of such cases, the question of what
'failure' may relevantly be. From the perspective of consequences, the
goods or benefits for the sake of which Gauguin's choice was made
either materialise in some degree, or do not materialise. But it matters
considerably to the thoughts we are considering, in what way the
project fails to come off, if it fails. If Gauguin sustains some injury on
the way to Tahiti which prevents his ever painting again, that certainly
means that his decision (supposing it now to be irreversible) was for
nothing, and indeed there is nothing in the outcome to set against the
other people's loss. But that train of events does not provoke the
thought in question, that after all he was wrong and unjustified. He
does not, and never will, know whether he was wrong. What would
prove him wrong in his project would not just be that it failed, but
that he failed.
This distinction shows that while Gauguin's justification is in some
ways a matter of luck, it is not equally a matter o f all kinds of luck.
It matters how intrinsic the cause of failure is to the project itself. The
occurrence of an injury is, relative to these undertakings at least, luck
of the most external and incident kind. Irreducibly, luck of this kind
affects whether he will be justified or not, since if it strikes, he will
not be justified. But it is too external for it to unjustify him, something
which only his failure as a painter can do; yet still that is, at another
level, luck, the luck of being able to be as he hoped he might be. It
might be wondered whether that is luck at all, or, if so, whether it
may not be luck o f that constitutive kind which affects everything and
which we have already left on one side. But it is more than that. It
is not merely luck that he is such a man, but luck relative to the
deliberations that went into his decision, that he turns out to be such
a man: he might (epistemically) not have been. That is what sets the
problem.
In some cases, though perhaps not in Gauguin's, success in such
decisions might be thought not to be a matter of epistemic luck relative
to the decision. There might be grounds for saying that the person
who was prepared to take the decision, and was in fact right, actually
knew that he would succeed, however subjectively uncertain he may
have been. But even if this is right for some cases, it does not help
with the problems of retrospective justification. For the concept of
knowledge here is itself applied retrospectively, and while there is
nothing wrong with that, it does not enable the agent at the time of 
26 Moral luck Moral luck 27
It would have been an intrinsic failure, also, if Vronsky had actually
committed suicide. It would not have been that, but rather an extrinsic
misfortune, if Vronsky has been accidentally killed. Though her project
would have been at an end, it would not have failed as it does fail.
This difference illustrates precisely the thoughts we are concerned
with. If Anna had then committed suicide, her thought might have
been something like: 'there is nothing more for me'. But I take it that
as things are, her thought in killing herself is not just that, but relates
inescapably also to the past and to what she has done. What she did,
she now finds insupportable, because she could have been justified only
by the life she hoped for, and those hopes were not just negated, but
refuted, by what happened.
It is such thoughts that I want to place in a structure which will
make their sense plainer. The discussion is not in the first place directed
to what we or others might say or think of these agents (though it
has implications for that), but on what they can be expected coherently
to think about themselves. A notion we shall be bound to use in
describing their state of mind is regret, and there are certain things that
need, first, to be said about this notion.
The constitutive thought of regret in general is something like 'how
much better if it had been otherwise', and the feeling can in principle
apply to anything of which one can form some conception of how
it might have been otherwise, together with consciousness of how
things would then have been better. In this general sense of regret, what
are regretted are states of affairs, and they can be regretted, in principle,
by anyone who knows of them. But there is a particularly important
species of regret, which I shall call 'agent-regret', which a person can
feel only towards his own past actions (or, at most, actions in which
he regards himself as a participant). In this case, the supposed possible
difference is that one might have acted otherwise, and the focus of the
regret is on that possibility, the thought being formed in part by
first-personal conceptions of how one might have acted otherwise.
'Agent-regret' is not distinguished from regret in general solely or
simply in virtue o f its subject-matter. There can be cases of regret
directed to one's own past actions which are not cases of agent-regret,
because the past action is regarded purely externally, as one might
regard anyone else's action. Agent-regret requires not merely a
first-personal subject-matter, nor yet merely a particular kind of
psychological content, but also a particular kind of expression.
The sentiment of agent-regret is by no means restricted to voluntary
his decision to make any distinctions he could not already make. As
one might say, even if it did turn out in such a case that the agent
did know, it was still luck, relative to the considerations available to
him at the time and at the level at which he made his decision, that
he should turn out to have known.
Some luck, in a decision of Gauguin's kind, is extrinsic to his project,
some intrinsic; both are necessary for success, and hence for actual
justification, but only the latter relates to unjustification. If we now
broaden the range of cases slightly, we shall be able to see more clearly
the notion of intrinsic luck. In Gauguin's case the nature of the project
is such that two distinctions do, roughly, coincide. One is a distinction
between luck intrinsic to the project, and luck extrinsic to it; the other
is a distinction between what is, and what is not, determined by him
and by what he is. The intrinsic luck in Gauguin's case concentrates
itself on virtually the one question of whether he is a genuinely gifted
painter who can succeed in doing genuinely valuable work. Not all
the conditions o f the project's coming off lie in him, obviously, since
others' actions and refrainings provide many necessary conditions of
its coming off - and that is an important locus of extrinsic luck. But
the conditions o f its coming off which are relevant to unjustification,
the locus of intrinsic luck, largely lie in him - which is not to say,
of course, that they depend on his will, though some may. This rough
coincidence of two distinctions is a feature of this case. But in others,
the locus of intrinsic luck (intrinsic, that is to say, to the project) may
lie partly outside the agent, and this is an important, and indeed the
more typical, case.
Consider an equally schematized account of another example, that
of Anna Karenina. Anna remains conscious in her life with Vronsky of
the cost exacted from others, above all from her son. She might have
lived with that consciousness, we may suppose, if things had gone
better, and relative to her state of understanding when she left Karenin,
they could have gone better. As it turns out, the social situation and
her own state of mind are such that the relationship with Vronsky has
to carry too much weight, and the more obvious that becomes, the
more it has to carry; and that I take that to be a truth not only about
society but about her and Vronsky, a truth which, however inevitable
Tolstoy ultimately makes it seem, could, relative to her earlier
thoughts, have been otherwise. It is, in the present terms, a matter of
intrinsic luck, and a failure in the heart of her project. But its locus
is not by any means entirely in her, for it also lies in him. 
28 Moral luck Moral luck 29
agency. It can extend far beyond what one intentionally did to almost
anything for which one was causally responsible in virtue of something
one intentionally did. Yet even at deeply accidental or non-voluntary
levels of agency, sentiments of agent-regret are different from regret
in general, such as might be felt by a spectator, and are acknowledged
in our practice as being different. The lorry driver who, through no
fault of his, runs over a child, will feel differently from any spectator,
even a spectator next to him in the cab, except perhaps to the extent
that the spectator takes on the thought that he himself might have
prevented it, an agent's thought. Doubtless, and rightly, people will
try, in comforting him, to move the driver from this state of feeling,
move him indeed from where he is to something more like the place
of a spectator, but it is important that this is seen as something that
should need to be done, and indeed some doubt would be felt about
a driver who too blandly or readily moved to that position. We feel
sorry for the driver, but that sentiment co-exists with, indeed
presupposes, that there is something special about his relation to this
happening, something which cannot merely be eliminated by the
consideration that it was not his fault. It may be still more so in cases
where agency is fuller than in such an accident, though still involuntary
through ignorance.
The differences between agent-regret and regret felt by a spectator
come out not just in thoughts and images that enter into the sentiment,
but in differences o f expression. The lorry-driver may act in some way
which he hopes will constitute or at least symbolise some kind of
recompense or restitution, and this will be an expression of his
agent-regret. But the willingness to give compensation, even the
recognition that one should give it, does not always express agent-regret,
and the preparedness to compensate can present itself at very different
levels of significance in these connexions. We may recognize the need
to pay compensation for damage we involuntarily cause, and yet this
recognition be of an external kind, accompanied only by regret of a
general kind, or by no regret at all. It may merely be that it would
be unfair for the sufferer to bear the cost if there is an alternative, and
there is an alternative to be found in the agent whose intentional
activities produced the damage as a side-effect.
In these cases, the relevant consciousness of having done the harmful
thing is basically that of its having happened as a consequence o f one's
acts, together with the thought that the cost of its happening can in
the circumstances fairly be allocated to one's account. A test of whether
that is an agent's state of mind in acknowledging that he should
compensate is offered by the question whether from this point of view
insurance cover would do at least as well. Imagine the premiums
already paid (by someone else, we might add, if that helps to clarify
the test): then if knowledge that the victim received insurance
payments would settle any unease the agent feels, then it is for him
an external case. It is an obvious and welcome consequence of this test
that whether an agent can acceptably regard a given case externally
is a function not only of his relations to it, but of what sort of case
it is — besides the question of whether he should compensate rather than
the insurance company, there is the question whether it is the sort of
loss that can be compensated at all by insurance. If it is not, an agent
conscious that he was unintentionally responsible for it might still feel
that he should do something, not necessarily because he could actually
compensate where insurance money could not, but because (if he is
lucky) his actions might have some reparative significance other than
compensation.
In other cases, again, there is no room for any appropriate action
at all. Then only the desire to make reparation remains, with the
painful consciousness that nothing can be done about it; some other
action, perhaps less directed to the victims, may come to express this.
What degree of such feeling is appropriate, and what attempts at
reparative action or substitutes for it, are questions for particular cases,
and that there is room in the area for irrational and self-punitive excess,
no one is likely to deny. But equally it would be a kind of insanity
never to experience sentiments of this kind towards anyone, and it
would be an insane concept of rationality which insisted that a rational
person never would. To insist on such a conception of rationality,
moreover, would, apart from other kinds of absurdity, suggest a large
falsehood: that we might, if we conducted ourselves clear-headedly
enough, entirely detach ourselves from the unintentional aspects o f our
actions, relegating their costs to, so to speak, the insurance fund, and
yet still retain our identity and character as agents. One's history as
an agent is a web in which anything that is the product of the will
is surrounded and held up and partly formed by things that are not,
in such a way that reflection can go only in one of two directions:
either in the direction of saying that responsible agency is a fairly
superficial concept, which has a limited use in harmonizing what
happens, or else that it is not a superficial concept, but that it cannot
ultimately be purified — if one attaches importance to the sense of what 
30 Moral luck Moral luck 31
the assumption in what follows.) Whatever feelings these agents had
after their decision, but before the declaration of their success or failure,
lacked the fully-developed wish to have acted otherwise — that wish
comes only when failure is declared.
Regret necessarily involves a wish that things had been otherwise,
for instance that one had not had to act as one did. But it does not
necessarily involve the wish, all things taken together, that one had
acted otherwise. An example of this, largely independent of the
present issues, is offered by the cases of conflict between two courses
of action each of which is morally required, where either course of
action, even if it is judged to be for the best, leaves regrets — which
are, in our present terms, agent-regrets about something voluntarily
done. 3
 We should not entirely assimilate agent-regret and the wish,
all things taken together, to have acted otherwise. We must now look
at some connexions of these to each other, and to certain ideas of
justification. This will add the last element to our attempt to
characterize our cases.
It will be helpful to contrast our cases with more straightforward
cases of practical deliberation and the types of retrospective reflexion
appropriate to them. We may take first the simplest cases of pure
egoistic deliberation, where not only is the agent's attention confined
to egoistic projects, but moral critics would agree that it is legitimately
so confined. Here, in one sense the agent does not have to justify his
deliberative processes, since there is no one he is answerable to, but
it is usually supposed that there is some sense in which even such an
agent's deliberative processes can be justified or unjustified — the sense,
that is, in which his decision can be reasonable or unreasonable relative
to his situation, whatever its actual outcome. Considerations bearing
on this include at least the consistency of his thoughts, the rational
assessment of probabilities, and the optimal ordering of actions in
time. 4
While the language of justification is used in this connexion, it is
less clear than is usually assumed what its content is, and, in particular,
what the point is of an agent's being retrospectively concerned with
the rationality of his decision, and not just with its success. How are
we to understand the retrospective thought of one who comes to see a
3
 For some discussion of this see 'Ethical Consistency', in Problems of the Self
(Cambridge 1973), pp. 166-86.
4
 A useful outline of such considerations is in D. A. J . Richards, A Theory of Reasons
for Action (Oxford 1971), ch. 3.
one is in terms of what one has done and what in the world one is
responsible for, one must accept much that makes its claim on that
sense solely in virtue of its being actual. 2
The examples of Gauguin and Anna Karenina are, of course, cases
of voluntary agency, but they share something with the involuntary
cases just mentioned, for the 'luck' of the agents relates to those
elements which are essential to the outcome but lie outside their
control, and what we are discussing is in this way a very drastic
example of determination by the actual, the determination of the
agents' judgments on their decisions by what, beyond their will,
actually occurs. Besides that, the discussion of agent-regret about the
involuntary also helps us to get away from a dichotomy which is often
relied on in these matters, expressed in such terms as regret and remorse,
where 'regret' is identified in effect as the regret of the spectator, while
'remorse' is what we have called 'agent-regret', but under the
restriction that it applies only to the voluntary. The fact that we have
agent-regret about the involuntary, and would not readily recognize
a life without it (though we may think we might), shows already that
there is something wrong with this dichotomy: such regret is neither
mere spectator's regret, nor (by this definition) remorse.
There is a difference between agent-regret as we have so far discussed
it, and the agents' feelings in the present cases. As we elicited it from
the non-voluntary examples, agent-regret involved a wish on the
agent's part that he had not done it. He deeply wishes that he had made
that change which, had he known it, was in his power and which would
have altered the outcome. But Gauguin or Anna Karenina, as we have
represented them, wish they had acted otherwise only if they are
unsuccessful. (At least, that wish attends their unsuccess under the
simplifying assumption that their subsequent thoughts and feelings are
still essentially formed by the projects we have ascribed to them. This
is an oversimplication, since evidently they might form new projects
in the course of unsuccess itself; though Anna did not. I shall sustain
2
 That acceptance is central to tragedy, something which itself presses the question
of how we want to think about these things. When Oedipus says 'I did not do it'
(Sophocles Oedipus at Colonus 539) he speaks as one whose exile and blindness
proclaim that he did do it, and to persons who treat him as quite special because
he did. Could we have, and do we want, a concept of agency by which what Oedipus
said would be simply true, and by which he would be seeing things rightly if for
him it was straight off as though he had no part in it? (These questions have little
to do with how the law should be: punishment and public amends are a different
matter.) 
32 Moral luck Moral luck 33
mismatch between his deliberations and the outcome? If he deliberates
badly, and as a result of this his projects go wrong, it is easy to see
in that case how his regret at the outcome appropriately attaches itself
to his deliberations. But if he deliberates well, and things go wrong;
particularly if, as sometimes happens, they would have gone better if
he had deliberated worse; what is the consciousness that he was
'justified' supposed to do for the disposition of his undoubted regret
about how things actually turned out? His thought that he was justified
seems to carry with it something like this: while he is sorry that things
turned out as they did, and, in a sense corresponding to that, he wishes
he had acted otherwise, at the same time he does not wish he had acted
otherwise, for he stands by the processes of rational deliberation which
led to what he did. Similarly with the converse phenomenon, where
having made and too late discovered some mistake o f deliberation,
the agent is by luck successful, and indeed would have been less
successful if he had done anything else. Here his gladness that he acted
as he did (his lack of a wish to have acted otherwise) operates at a level
at which it is compatible with such feelings as self-reproach or
retrospective alarm at having acted as he did.
These observations are truisms, but it remains obscure what their
real content is. Little is effected by talk of self-reproach or regret at all,
still less of co-existent regret and contentment, unless some expression
of such sentiments can be identified. Certainly it is not to be identified
in this case with any disposition to compensate other persons, for none
is affected. Connected with that, criticism by other persons would be
on a different basis from criticism offered where they had a grievance,
as in a case where an agent risks goods of which he is a trustee, through
error, oversight, or (interestingly) merely through the choice of a
high-risk strategy to which he would be perfectly entitled if he were
acting solely in his own interests. The trustee is not entitled to gamble
with the infants' money even if any profits will certainly go to the
infants, and success itself will not remove, or start to remove, that
objection. That sort of criticism is of course not appropriate in the
purely egoistic case, and in fact there is no reason to think that criticism
by others is more than a consequential consideration in the egoistic case,
derived from others' recommendation of the virtues of rational
prudence, which need to be explained first.
Granted that there is no issue of compensation to others in the purely
egoistic case, the form of expression of regret seems necessarily to be,
as Richards has said, 5
 the agent's resolutions for his future deliberations.
His regrets about his deliberations express themselves as resolves to
think better next time; satisfaction with the deliberation, however
disappointing the particular outcome, expresses itself in this, that he
finds nothing to be learned from the case, and is sure that he will have
no better chance of success (at a given level of pay-off) next time by
changing his procedures. If this is right, then the notions of regret or
lack of regret at the past level of deliberative excellence makes sense
only in the context of a policy or disposition of rational deliberation
applied to an on-going class of cases.
This is a modest enough conception — it is important to see how
modest it is. It implies a class of cases sufficiently similar for deliberative
practices to be translated from one to another of them; it does not
imply that these cases are all conjointly the subject of deliberative
reasoning. I may make a reasoned choice between alternatives of a
certain kind today, and, having seen how it turns out, resolve to deal
rather differently with the next choice of that kind, but I need not either
engage in or resolve to engage in any deliberative reasoning which
weighs the options of more than one such occasion together. 6
Insofar as the outcomes of different such situations affect one
another, there is indeed pressure to say that rational deliberation should
in principle consider them together. But if one knew enough, virtually
any choice would be seen to affect all later ones, so it has seemed to
some that the ideal limit of this process is something which is far more
ambitious than the modest notion of an ongoing disposition to rational
deliberation. This is the model of rational deliberation as directed to a
life-plan, in Rawls' sense, which treats all times of one's life as of equal
concern to one. 7
 The theorists of this picture agree that as a matter
of fact ignorance and other factors do usually make it rational to
discount over remoteness in time, but these are subsequent considerations brought to a model which is that of one's life as a rectangle,
so to speak, presented all at once and to be optimally filled in. This
5
 Op. cit., pp. 70-1 , and cf. ch. 13 .
6
 The notion of treating cases together, as opposed to treating them separately but
in the light of experience, applies not only to deliberation which yields in advance
a conjunctive resolution of a number of cases, but also to deliberation which yields
hypothetical conclusions to the effect that a later case will receive a certain treatment
if an earlier case turns out in a certain way: as in a staking system.
7
 John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (Oxford, 1972), esp. ch. VII; Thomas Nagel, The
Possibility of Altruism (Oxford, 1970). 
34 Moral luck Moral luck 35
does) that there is some currency o f satisfactions, in terms of which
it is possible to compare quite neutrally the value of one set of
preferences together with their fulfilments, as against a quite different
set of preferences together with their fulfilments. But there is no reason
to suppose that there is any such currency, nor that the idea of practical
rationality should implicitly presuppose it.
If there is no such currency, then we can only to a limited extent
abstract from the projects and preferences we actually have, and cannot
in principle gain a standpoint from which the alternative fillings of our
life-rectangle could be compared without prejudice. The perspective
of deliberative choice on one's life is constitutively from here. Correspondingly the perspective of assessment with greater knowledge is
necessarily from there, and not only can I not guarantee how factually
it will then be, but I cannot ultimately guarantee from what standpoint
of assessment my major and most fundamental regrets will be.
For many decisions which are part o f the agent's ongoing activity
(the 'normal science', so to speak, of the moral life) we can see why
it is that the presence or absence of regrets is more basically conditioned
by the retrospective view of the deliberative processes, than by the
particular outcomes. Oneself and one's viewpoint are more basically
identified with the dispositions of rational deliberation, applicable to
an ongoing series of decisions, than they are with the particular projects'
which succeed or fail on those occasions. But there are certain other
decisions, as in the cases we are considering, which are not like this.
There is indeed some room for the presence and subsequent assessment
of deliberative rationality. The agents in our cases might well not be
taken as seriously as they would otherwise if they did not, to the limited
extent that the situation permits, take such rational thought as they
can about the realities o f their situation. But this is not the aspect under
which they will primarily look back on it, nor is it as a contribution
to a series of deliberative situations that it will have its importance for
them. Though they will learn from it, it will not be in that way. In
these cases, the project in the interests of which the decision is made
is one with which the agent is identified in such a way that if it succeeds,
his stand-point of assessment will be from a life which then derives
an important part of its significance for him from that very fact; if
he fails, it can, necessarily, have no such significance in his life. If he
succeeds, it cannot be that while welcoming the outcome he more
basically regrets the decision. If he fails, his standpoint will be o f one
for whom the ground project of the decision has proved worthless,
model is presented not only as embodying the ideal fulfilment of a
rational urge to harmonize all one's projects. It is also supposed to
provide a special grounding for the idea that a more fundamental form
of regret is directed to deliberative error than to mere mistake. The
regret takes the form of self-reproach, and the idea is that we protect
ourselves against reproaches from our future self if we act with
deliberative rationality: 'nothing can protect us from the ambiguities
and limitations of our knowledge, or guarantee that we find the best
alternative open to us. Acting with deliberative rationality can only
ensure that our conduct is above reproach, and that we are responsible
to ourselves as one person over time.' 8
 These strains come together
in Rawls' advocacy of 'the guiding principle that a rational individual
is always to act so that he need never blame himself no matter how
things finally transpire'. 9
Rawls seems to regard this injunction as, in a sense, formal, and as
not determining how risky or conservative a strategy the agent should
adopt, but it is worth remarking that if any grounding for self-reproach
about deliberative error is to be found in the notion of the recriminations
of one's later self, the injunction will in fact have to be taken in a more
materially cautious sense. The grounding relies on an analogy with the
responsibility to other persons: I am a trustee for my own future. If
this has any force at all, it is hard to see why it does not extend to
my being required, like any other trustee, to adopt a cautious strategy
with the entrusted goods — which are, in this case, almost everything
I have.
However that may be, the model that gives rise to the injunction
is false. Apart from other difficulties,10
 it implicitly ignores the obvious
fact that what one does and the sort of life one leads condition one's
later desires and judgments. The standpoint of that retrospective judge
who will be my later self will be the product o f my earlier choices.
So there is no set of preferences both fixed and relevant, relative to
which the various fillings o f my life-space can be compared. If the
fillings are to be evaluated by reference to what I variously, in them,
want, the relevant preferences are not fixed, while if they are to be
evaluated by what I now (for instance) want, this will give a fixed
set of preferences, but one that is not necessarily relevant. The recourse
from this within the life-space model is to assume (as Utilitarianism
8
 Rawls, pp. 422-3 .
 9 p. 422.
1 0
 It ignores also the very basic fact that the size of the rectangle is up to me: see chapter
1 , above. 
36 Moral luck Moral luck 37
a moral point of view, then no-one can justifiably complain, from that
point of view, of his so acting. But this as a general requirement is
unrealistically strong, as can be seen from political cases, 1 2
 for instance,
in which we can have reason to approve of the outcome, and of the
agent's choice to produce that outcome, and of his being an agent who
is able to make that choice, while conscious that there has been a 'moral
cost'. It is not reasonable, in such a case, to expect those particular
people who have been cheated, used or injured to approve o f the agent's
action, nor should they be subjected to the patronising thought that,
while their complaints are not justified in terms of the whole picture,
they are too closely involved to be able to see that truth. Their
complaints are, indeed, justified, and they may quite properly refuse
to accept the agent's justification which the rest of us may properly
accept. The idea that there has been a moral cost itself implies that
something bad has been done, and, very often, that someone has been
wronged, and if the people who have been wronged do not accept
the justification, then no-one can demand that they should. It is for
them to decide how far they are prepared to adopt the perspective
within which the justification counts. This is just one of the ways — the
distancing of time is another — in which, if the moral sentiments are
to be part of life as it is actually experienced, they cannot be modelled
on a view of the world in which every happening and every person
is at the same distance.
Our cases are admittedly different from the case o f the politician.
There, the justifying conditions relate to issues of what we want
effected, what system of government we want, what persons we want
to work within that system, and those wants may themselves be shaped
by what are, in an everyday sense, moral considerations. With the
agents in our examples, it is not the same, and there is, moreover, a
difference between the examples themselves. If Gauguin's project
succeeds, it can yield a good for the world as Anna's success could not.
The moral spectator has to consider the fact that he has reason to be
glad that Gauguin succeeded, and hence that he tried — or if a particular
spectator finds that he has no disposition to be grateful for Gauguin's
paintings, or for paintings, then there will be some other case.
It may be said that this merely represents our gratitude that morality
does not always prevail — that moral values have been treated as one
value among others, not as unquestionably supreme. I think that that
misdescribes our relation to this Gauguin, at least, but it is important
1 2
 See chapter 4, below.
and this (under the simplifying assumption that other adequate projects
are not generated in the process) must leave him with the most basic
regrets. So if he fails, his most basic regrets will attach to his decision,
and if he succeeds, they cannot. That is the sense in which his decision
can be justified, for him, by success.
On this account, it is clear that the decisions we are concerned with
are not merely very risky ones, or even very risky ones with a
substantial outcome. The outcome has to be substantial in a special
way — in a way which importantly conditions the agent's sense of what
is significant in his life, and hence his standpoint of retrospective
assessment. It follows from this that they are, indeed, risky, and in a
way which helps to explain the importance for such projects of the
difference between extrinsic and intrinsic failure. With an intrinsic
failure, the project which generated the decision is revealed as an empty
thing, incapable of grounding the agent's life. With extrinsic failure,
it is not so revealed, and while he must acknowledge that it has failed,
nevertheless it has not been discredited, and may, perhaps in the form
of some new aspiration, contribute to making sense of what is left.
In his retrospective thought, and its allocation of basic regret, he cannot
in the fullest sense identify with his decision, and so does not find
himself justified; but he is not totally alienated from it either, cannot
just see it as a disastrous error, and so does not find himself unjustified.
What is the relation of all this, finally, to morality? Does it have
any very direct relation? Thomas Nagel, 1 1
 who agrees that morality
is deeply and disquietingly subject to luck, denies that an example such
as Gauguin's shows that to be so — rather, it shows that Gauguin's
most basic retrospective feelings do not have to be moral.
One reason that Nagel gives for this understanding of the matter
is that (as I suggested earlier) Gauguin may not be able to justify
himself to others, in the sense that they will have no justified grievance.
However, this consideration just in itself will not carry great weight
unless one makes a strong assumption about the nature of ethical
consistency, to the effect that, if someone has acted justifiably from
1 1
 In his contribution to the symposium for which this paper was originally written:
Proc. Arist. Soc. Supp. Vol. L (1976), reprinted with revisions in his Mortal Questions
(Cambridge, 1979). I have benefited from Nagel's paper and from discussion with
him. I entirely agree with him that the involvement of morality with luck is not
something that can simply be accepted without calling our moral conceptions into
question. That was part of my original point; I have tried to state it more directly
in the present version of this paper. A difference between Nagel and myself is that
I am more sceptical about our moral conceptions than he is. 
38 Moral luck Moral luck 39
also to bear in mind the grounds, the scope and the significance of that
gratitude, which I mentioned earlier, for the limitations o f morality.
If the moral were really supreme, it would have to be ubiquitous:
like Spinoza's substance, if it were to be genuinely unconditioned, there
would have to be nothing to condition it.
That is a demand which, only too familiarly, can extend itself among
the feelings. The ultimate justice which the Kantian outlook so
compellingly demands requires morality, as immune to luck, to be
supreme, and while that does not formally require that there be no
other sentiments or attachments, in fact it can, like the Robespierrean
government to which Heine compared the Kantian system in general,
steadily grow to require a wider conformity of the sentiments. Justice
requires not merely that something I am should be beyond luck, but
that what I most fundamentally am should be so, and, in the light of that,
admiration or liking or even enjoyment of the happy manifestations
of luck can seem to be treachery to moral worth. That guilty levelling
of the sentiments can occur even if one recognizes, as Kant recognized,
that there are some things that one is responsible for, and others for
which one is not. The final destruction occurs when the Kantian sense
of justice is joined to a Utilitarian conception of negative responsibility,
and one is left, at any level o f importance, only with purely moral
motivations and no limit to their application. There is, at the end of
that, no life of one's own, except perhaps for some small area,
hygienically allotted, of meaningless privacy.
Because that is a genuine pathology of the moral life, the limitation
of the moral is itself something morally important. But to regard
Gauguin's decision simply as a welcome incursion of the amoral is
anyway too limited. It will be adequate only if he is the amoral
Gauguin we put aside at the beginning. If he is not, then he is himself
open to regrets for what he has done to others, and, if he fails, then
those regrets are not only all that he has, but, as I have tried to explain,
he no longer even has the perspective within which something else
could have been laid against them. That can make a difference to the
moral spectator. While he may admire the amoral Gauguin's
achievements, and indeed admire him, this other Gauguin is someone
who shares the same world of moral concerns. The risk these agents
run is a risk within morality, a risk which amoral versions of these
agents would not run at all.
The fact that these agents' justifications, if they acquired them,
would not properly silence all complaints, does not itself lead to the
conclusion that they are not moral justifications. However, perhaps we
should, all the same, accept that conclusion. Their moral luck, we
should then say, does not lie in acquiring a moral justification. It lies
rather in the relation of their life, and of their justification or lack of
it, to morality. That relation has to be seen in the first instance in their
perspective, one in which, if they fail, there is simply regret. But their
life is recognizably part of moral life, and it has a significance for us
as well.
There is now, however, a pressing question — how much is being
done by the concept of the moral, and how much by this stage of the
argument does it matter what happens to it? In reminding ourselves
of the significance of luck to the moral life - whether it is constitutive
luck, or that which affects the relations of one's decisions to morality,
or that which affects merely what one will turn out to have done - we
essentially use the concept, because we are working out in reflection
from central applications of the concept to question what may be a
basic motive for using it at all: 1 3
 the motive o f establishing a dimension
of decision and assessment which can hope to transcend luck. Once
that motive is understood and questioned, it has to be asked once more
what the concept is for, and, by the same token, how many other
features of it can be taken for granted.
Scepticism about the freedom of morality from luck cannot leave
the concept of morality where it was, any more than it can remain
undisturbed by scepticism about the very closely related image we
have of there being a moral order, within which our actions have a
significance which may not be accorded to them by mere social
recognition. These forms of scepticism will leave us with a concept
of morality, but one less important, certainly, than ours is usually taken
to be; and that will not be ours, since one thing that is particularly
important about ours is how important it is taken to be. 